=Introduction=

Ocsigen Start is the fastest way to get started with Ocsigen. It
consists of a library and an associated application template that
combined implement standard functionality like users and
notifications. The programmer can thus focus on the specificities of
their application domain and quickly obtain a Minimum Viable Product
(MVP).

Ocsigen Start is built on Eliom. Eliom focuses on the core machinery,
while Ocsigen Start provides higher-level concepts that require a
database and certain design decisions.

Ocsigen Start is mobile-friendly. The template application readily
works as an Android and iOS application (via
[[https://cordova.apache.org/|Cordova]]).

==Implementation overview==

===Template===

The library portion of Ocsigen Start contains core functionality that
is common across Ocsigen Start applications, while the template can be
customized for the specific application at hand.

The template additionally contains a demonstration of relevant
[[https://github.com/ocsigen/ocsigen-toolkit|Ocsigen Toolkit]]
widgets. The demo portion can easily be removed.

===Database===

For implementing users, a database is needed. Specifically, we use
[[https://www.postgresql.org/|PostgreSQL]] via the
[[http://pgocaml.forge.ocamlcore.org/|PGOCaml]] library. The template
and the library make common assumptions about the database schema. The
database thus needs to be instantiated in a certain way; this is
automatically done by appropriate targets in the template's build
system.

The same database can used for the specific needs of the application
at hand. For that, new tables can be added. The original ones should
remain in place for Ocsigen Start to work correctly.

===Internationalization (i18n)===

The template is available in multiple languages (English and French) using
[[https://github.com/besport/ocsigen-i18n|ocsigen-i18n]]. All translations used
in the template are defined in the file {{assets/PROJECT_NAME_i18n.tsv}}. The
Makefile rule {{i18n-udpate}} generates the i18n module. You need to use it
every time the TSV file is updated.

See {{Makefile.i18n}} for rules about i18n and {{Makefile.options}} to
personalize the internalization of your application (for example add new
languages, change default language, change TSV filename).

===Managing e-mails===

The template application keeps track of users' e-mails and implements
e-mail validation. For that, {{{sendmail}}} (or another mail transfer
agent compatible with it) needs to be installed on the host.

===Style===

The application provides a standard style matching contemporary
aesthetics. For this, we use [[http://sass-lang.com/|SASS]]. The style
can be customized by modifying the SASS files that are part of the
template.

==Installation==

Ocsigen Start can be installed via
[[https://opam.ocaml.org/|OPAM]]. The package name is {{{ocsigen-start}}}.
The template application can be instantiated via {{{eliom-distillery}}}:

<<code language="shell"|
eliom-distillery -name $APP_NAME -template os.pgocaml
>>

(Replace $APP_NAME by the name of your application).

For details on launching the application, refer to the template's
[[https://github.com/ocsigen/ocsigen-start/blob/master/template.distillery/README.md|README]].

==Library overview==

We provide a tour of the Ocsigen Start library. All modules have
server- and client-side versions. (In the API documentation, there are
links near the top of each module page for selecting the side.)

The template uses all these modules, and can thus act as a good
starting guide. Look around!

=== User interface ===

Various modules for producing icons, messages, custom pages, tips,
connection forms, etc.

* <<a_api subproject="server" | module Os_icons>>:
  manage CSS icons.
* <<a_api subproject="server" | module Os_msg>>:
  write messages in the browser console.
* <<a_api subproject="server" | module Os_page>>:
  utilities for building HTML pages that follow the standard Ocsigen
  Start layout.
* <<a_api subproject="server" | module Os_tips>>:
  display tips to the user.
* <<a_api subproject="server" | module Os_user_view>>:
  functions for creating password forms and other common UI elements
  appearing in applications and for managing the user connection box.
* <<a_api subproject="server" | module Os_uploader>>:
  ImageMagick-based tools for manipulating avatars.

=== Users and groups ===

* <<a_api subproject="server" | module Os_user>>,
  <<a_api subproject="server" | module Os_current_user>>,
  <<a_api subproject="server" | module Os_group>>:
  manage users and groups thereof.

* <<a_api subproject="server" | module Os_db>>:
  directly access the database. In many cases, it is a better idea to
  use higher-level modules (e.g.,
  <<a_api subproject="server" | module Os_user>>).

* <<a_api subproject="server" | module Os_types>>:
  core types shared by <<a_api subproject="server" | module Os_db>>
  and the higher-level modules.

=== Communication ===

* <<a_api subproject="server" | module Os_notif>>:
  send notifications to connected users.

* <<a_api subproject="server" | module Os_email>>:
  send e-mails.

* <<a_api subproject="server" | module Os_fcm_notif>>:
  send push notifications to mobile devices.

* <<a_api subproject="server" | module Os_comet>>:
  manage the bi-directional communication channel between client and
  server. This is a low-level module that you probably don't need.

=== Services, handlers, sessions ===

* <<a_api subproject="server" | module Os_services>>:
  Eliom services pre-defined by Ocsigen Start. These produce the
  default user interface of the template.
  See <<a_manual project="eliom" subproject="server"
  chapter="server-services" | the Eliom manual page on services>> for
  a general introduction to Eliom services.

* <<a_api subproject="server" | module Os_handlers>>:
  The handlers (functions) that implement the services in
  <<a_api subproject="server" | module Os_services>>.
  <<a_manual project="eliom" subproject="server"
  chapter="server-outputs" | The Eliom manual page on service handlers>>
  explains how to implement handlers.

* <<a_api subproject="server" | module Os_session>>:
  manage user sessions, e.g., execute actions when users connect or
  disconnect.

=== Other utilities ===

* <<a_api subproject="server" | module Os_date>>:
  utilities for manipulating date and time values.

* <<a_api subproject="server" | module Os_platform>>:
  obtain information about the platform we are on (Android, iOS, ...).

* <<a_api subproject="server" | module Os_request_cache>>,
  <<a_api subproject="server" | module Os_user_proxy>>:
  different forms of caching data.
