=Introduction=

Ocsigen Start is the fastest way to get started with Ocsigen. It
consists of a library and an associated application template that
combined implement standard functionality like users and
notifications. The programmer can thus focus on the specificities of
their application domain and quickly obtain a Minimum Viable Product
(MVP).

Ocsigen Start is built on Eliom. Eliom focuses on the core machinery,
while Ocsigen Start provides higher-level concepts that require a
database and certain design decisions.

Ocsigen Start is mobile-friendly. The template application readily
works as an Android and iOS application (via
[[https://cordova.apache.org/|Cordova]]).

==Implementation overview==

===Template===

The library portion of Ocsigen Start contains core functionality that
is common across Ocsigen Start applications, while the template can be
customized for the specific application at hand.

The template additionally contains a demonstration of relevant
[[https://github.com/ocsigen/ocsigen-toolkit|Ocsigen Toolkit]]
widgets. The demo portion can easily be removed.

===Database===

For implementing users, a database is needed. Specifically, we use
[[https://www.postgresql.org/|PostgreSQL]] via the
[[http://pgocaml.forge.ocamlcore.org/|PGOCaml]] library. The template
and the library make common assumptions about the database schema. The
database thus needs to be instantiated in a certain way; this is
automatically done by appropriate targets in the template's build
system. The database can be

===Managing e-mails===

The template application keeps track of users' e-mails and implements
e-mail validation. For that, {{{sendmail}}} (or another mail transfer
agent compatible with it) needs to be installed on the host.

===Style===

The application provides a standard style matching contemporary
aesthetics. For this, we use [[http://sass-lang.com/|SASS]]. The style
can be customized by modifying the SASS files that are part of the
template.

==Installation==

Ocsigen Start can be installed via
[[https://opam.ocaml.org/|OPAM]]. The package name is {{{ocsigen-start}}}.
The template application can be instantiated via {{{eliom-distillery}}}:

<<code language="shell"|
eliom-distillery -name $APP_NAME -template os.pgocaml
>>

For details on launching the application, refer to the template's
[[https://github.com/ocsigen/ocsigen-start/blob/master/template.distillery/README.md|README]].
